MARKETS IN THEORY AND PRACTICE
Rogers, Soc 125 F2025, L2
Learning Outcomes
Stepping back:
• Trigger warning (not warnings)
• Clarification on Gini
• Warning about statistics
• A problem with humanity and what you can do about it
Moving forward:
• Free market ideal
• Political consequences of taking it seriously: classical
liberalism
• What’s wrong with that ideal
– Market imperfections and failures (PDs and FRPs)
– Collective action problems
• Political consequences of recognizing that
Stepping back
This whole class is a trigger
• I’m told you are the anxious generation
• And VERY VERY sensitive
• And that compassion for you requires that I
warn you, IN ADVANCE, about things that
might upset you
• So here’s your warning
• THIS WHOLE CLASS IS A TRIGGER
The Gini coefficient
The Gini coefficient is the ratio of the area that lies between the line of equality and the Lorenz
curve (marked 'A' in the diagram) over the total area under the line of equality (the sum of 'A'
and 'B' in the diagram); i.e., G=A/(A+B). The Gini coefficient can range from 0 to 1; it is
sometimes multiplied by 100 to range between 0 and 100. A low Gini coefficient indicates a
more equal distribution, with 0 corresponding to complete equality, while higher Gini
coefficients indicate more unequal distribution, with 1 corresponding to complete inequality.
Line of simple (perfect) equality
Cumulative share of population Cumulative share of incomeSimple (perfect) equality
Simple inequality (in red)
Actual US distribution
Some GINI’s
Each decile earns 20% more than previous
Simple equality
Recent example of important dispute
Recent example of important disputeaka “There are lies, damn lies, and statistics”
Measuring poverty
Usual (Relative) Measure: Poverty is defined as having an
income below 50% of the median equivalized (for
household size, age of dependents) disposable household
income in a given country.
US (Absolute) Measure: Poverty is defined as 3X the real
(inflation corrected) cost of a minimal diet, equivalized for
family size
SPM
The Supplemental Poverty Measure (SPM) is an
expanded poverty metric used by the U.S. Census
Bureau to provide a more comprehensive view of
economic hardship than the official poverty measure. It
includes non-cash benefits from government programs
like SNAP and housing subsidies, accounts for necessary
expenses such as taxes, work-related costs, and medical
expenses, and factors in geographical differences in
housing costs. The SPM aims to supplement, not replace,
the official measure by better illustrating how public
programs and varying expenses affect a family's financial
well-being
Recent example of important dispute
Recent example of important dispute
What’s the (basic) problem with humanity?
• We’ve still got late Pleistocene Era (2.58M to 11.7K years ago)
hunter-gatherer brains but modern toys and while we
dominate others, we don’t play well with each other. Macro
evolution changes generally take at least 25K years (1K
generations). We’ve been “civilized” for only about 10K (400).
So, it’s no surprise that we act so immaturely.
• Cultural evolution can go much quicker. Evolution gave us a
frontal cortex. That brain gave us “culture” (religion, art,
science, political and economic institutions). And over the
past few hundred years, with a capitalism fueled by plant
graveyards, that culture has made us, as a species, almost
indescribably better off than we’ve ever been. But it’s
produced unnecessary inequality, unfreedoms in governing,
and threatens a Sixth Extinction.
What’s the problem (cont)
• Kant always asked: What can we know/What must we
do/What may we hope for
• We know that we’re all connected, that our species’ success
comes from scaled cooperation, and that the fruits of
cooperation have no real limit
• What we must do is deepen life on just terms.
• And, given our natures, that’s a reasonable hope
• So what’s keeping us from doing this?
• Partly it’s our (from a long view) adolescent natures.
• Partly it’s abusive power and bad habits, ossified into
oppressively limiting institutions and culture
Some answers, and more tasks
• But a large part of it is how all these things interact with our
brains; here it’s good always to keep in mind the “12
confusions”/“defects”/”sins”
• And part of it has to do, even among people with good will,
with confusion about possibilities
– False necessity (“TINA”)
– Structures and social change (revolution, reform, culturally and
politically evolutionary “reforev”)
• Part of it has to do with the apparent meaningless of life,
which is probably the biggest mistake of all, since it has
incomparable value and you can, with a little effort, give it
meaning
• How?
• Love (some thing, some body)
Stepping forward
Markets in Theory and Practice
Markets in theory
1. Consumers express preferences through buying
2. Buying gives consumers exclusive control of the good – “exclusion
principle”
3. If supply differs from demand, producers to adjust to the point
that supply and demand of any given good converge at a given
price –“law of supply and demand” (If firms fail to respond to
consumers, they will eventually fail. This competition among firms
generates accountability. It also spurs technical change and other
improvements in productivity, which increases social wealth.)
4. At equilibrium (after all trades are made), the result is – given
natural scarcity, current levels of technology, and a given
distribution of income – a perfect match between consumer
preferences and production possibilities –“Pareto optimality”
Markets have the effect of making an individual who “intends only his own
gain” to be “led by an invisible hand to promote an end which was no part
of his intention. Nor is it always the worse for the society that it was no part
of it. By pursuing his own interest he frequently promotes that of the society
more effectively than when he really intends to promote it.”
Adam Smith, Wealth of Nations, 1776
Adam Smith on markets and human nature
[However selfish] man may be supposed, there are evidently
some principles in his nature, which interest him in the
fortunes of others, and render their happiness necessary to
him, though he derives nothing from it, except the pleasure
of seeing it.
Adam Smith, The Theory of Moral Sentiments, 1759
Huge political consequences
• Redefined the role of the state, and the relation of
economic and political power
• For a very long time, political and economic power
had effectively been fused
• Great question of social life, especially regarding
inequalities, is often “Sez who?” (legitimation
question)
— “You have more money than I do. Sez who?”
— “You have more power than I do. Sez who?”
• God?
• Markets and classical liberalism say: YOU DO!
HUGE!
A king descended from God?
Classical liberalism
• Self-regulating markets
• Limited government (“that government is best
which governs least”)
• Natural (not just positive) right to private property
and its accumulation
• Universal civil rights and civil liberties
A popular political system of belief in ...
For classical liberals, there are ...
Things the state should do
• Provide law and order
(security, enforcement of
contracts)
• Provide basic public goods
(sanitation, transportation
and other physical
infrastructure, general
education)
• Ensure competition and
limit “negative externalities”
or “neighborhood effects”
And things it should not
• Create anti-poverty programs
or social insurance schemes
• Subsidize higher education or
training for workers
• Set limits to the terms of
contracts between employers
and workers
• Limit speculation or arbitrage
• Otherwise substitute its
judgment for that of the market
“Free market ideal” is one in which
1. All participants have perfect information (about their wants,
capacities, character of goods ... and it helps if also about the
future, each other, all possibilities and contingencies)
2. All markets (in goods, capital, and labor) are competitive
3. All costs are reflected in prices
4. All preferences are given or “exogenous”
5. Exchanges have no transaction costs, and all investment is
divisible and fungible, permitting easy trading
6. There is no state “interference” (taxes, subsidies, etc.) that
distorts the above
7. Everyone is motivated solely by maximizing personal “utility,”
usually measured by wealth or income
Is this plausible?
No it’s not, but that doesn’t end the story
• Very unworldly assumptions about information flow,
individual capacity, power distributions, and much else –
• “The invisible hand is invisible because it doesn’t exist”
Joseph Stiglitz (Nobel Laureate, 2001)
• But ask about alternatives. If you don’t want markets
ordering the economy, what do you want? Government?
Associations? Societies vary in the degree to which they rely
on markets, government, and associations in running
themselves
• And they combine them in different ways, or order their
importance in different permutations, with signaled
differentiation of their logics or ruled institutions much more
common than their robust separation
Markets are bundles of rules
1. What can be individually owned and traded (the genome? slaves?
nuclear materials? babies? votes? ideas?)
2. With what information, under what conditions (poisonous drugs?
unsafe foods? deceptive Ponzi schemes? uninsured derivatives?
dangerous workplaces?)
3. On what terms (equal access to the internet? the right to bargain
collectively and not just individually? corporate monopolies? the
length of patent protections?)
4. And what public goods not subject to such individual ownership
and trading do we want (security? roads? clean air and clean
water? healthcare? good schools? parks and playgrounds?)
5. And how we pay for those things (taxes? user fees? other?), with
what information (that all taxes kill growth? that jobs from
gezillionaires?) and on what terms (does your vote count or not?)
Markets are a desirable feature of any complex economy because (1)
they contribute in significant ways to efficiency and (2) the opportunity
for market exchanges positively affects at least some aspects of
individual freedom
But (3) “self regulating” markets are largely a fiction (markets require
rules to work, which they can’t provide themselves), and (4) “free”
markets (i.e, those with minimal government regulation) do not come
even close to performing in optimally efficient ways and actually limit
individual freedom
So (5) what we need are both markets and different non-market
(ideally, democratic) institutions (including but not limited to the state)
to supplement markets, steer them toward producing more socially
desirable results, or provide those results directly
AS’ general argument about markets
Capitalism – an economic system oriented to the production and
exchange of commodities (including “free labor”) for profit, in
which most means of doing so (“the means of production”) are
privately owned, in which most investment is thus also privately
controlled, and in which most adults participate in and depend on
the functioning of the labor market, and work for someone else
Remember, we’re generally talking about
markets under capitalism, aka “market
capitalism”
Let’s unpack that
Market capitalism: A bit of a pleonasm, but not entirely. All capitalisms
require markets. But not all markets require capitalism.
Production: Making something (this could be for profit or not)
Production for exchange: Production is not for use by the producer, but
to sell to others
Commodities: The things you produce for exchange (commodification:
extension of the market into spheres previously not governed by
exchange; decommodification: Retreat from market provision)
Profit: A much-disputed term, but for now, the positive difference
between the cost of producing something and the return to the
producer of it
Investment: Something done now for future return
Labor Market: Markets are simply institutions supporting the exchange
of commodities; the labor market simply that for the commodity of
“free labor”
Moral Argument: market capitalism promotes
increased individual and aggregate (social)
freedom
Pragmatic argument: market capitalism promotes
increased individual and aggregate (social)
efficiency and wealth creation
Two big pro-market arguments
The Moral Argument
Negative Freedom: “Freedom from” – no one can physically
force you to do things
Positive Freedom: “Freedom to” – the actual capacity to do
things, to realize your goals (usually requiring “freedom with”
– the ability to combine in social action with others)
The market is a pretty good institution for realizing negative
freedom. But the “free” (aka unregulated) market generates
great inequalities in positive freedom, increasing it for some
people while reducing it for others
Market capitalism promotes freedom
Allocative efficiency: assigning things as precisely as possible, with
no harm to anyone – “Pareto optimal” (Pareto)
Dynamic efficiency: making optimal innovation (Schumpeter)
Macro-economic efficiency: making fullest possible use of
productive inputs to promote smooth running of the system –
low inflation, low unemployment , etc. (Keynes)
Resource efficiency: making maximally productive and/or
restorative use of needed but non-renewable inputs (Daly)
The Pragmatic Argument
Market capitalism promotes social efficiency and wealth creation
Four types of efficiency
Vilfredo Pareto
15 July 1848–19 August 1923
Joseph Schumpeter
8 February 1883–8 January 1950
John Maynard Keynes
5 June 1883–21 April 1946
Herman Daly
1938 –
Optimality: the best possible outcome of a process
Pareto Optimality: a distribution of things such that no one can
be made better off without someone becoming worse off
Pareto sub-optimality: a distribution of things in which at least
one person could be made better off without anyone being
made worse off
Basic claim about markets: free markets generate Pareto
optimal distributions of things exchanged on the market
Markets primarily about allocative efficiency
Keynesianism
1. Economies sometimes produce much less than they could, and employ
many fewer workers than they should, because there just isn’t enough
spending. Such episodes can happen for a variety of reasons; the
question is how to respond.
2. There are normally forces that tend to push the economy back toward
full employment. But they work slowly; a hands-off policy toward
depressed economies means accepting a long, unnecessary period of
pain.
3. It is often possible to drastically shorten this period of pain and greatly
reduce the human and financial losses by “printing money”, using the
central bank’s power of currency creation to push interest rates down.
4. Sometimes, however, monetary policy loses its effectiveness, especially
when rates are close to zero. In that case temporary deficit spending can
provide a useful boost. And conversely, fiscal austerity in a depressed
economy imposes large economic losses.
NB: Text in this slide and next from Paul Krugman, NYT blog, 9/16/15
Anti-Keynesianism “bogosity”
B1: Any economic recovery, no matter how slow and how delayed, proves
Keynesian economics wrong. See [2] above for why that’s illiterate.
B2: Keynesians believe that printing money solves all problems. See [3]:
printing money can solve one specific problem, an economy operating far
below capacity. Nobody said that it can conjure up higher productivity, or
cure the common cold.
B3: Keynesians always favor deficit spending, under all conditions. See [4]:
The case for fiscal stimulus is quite restrictive, requiring both a depressed
economy and severe limits to monetary policy. That just happens to be the
world we’ve been living in lately.
Market imperfections, failures, and effects
In thinking about the function of actually existing markets,
it’s useful to distinguish among
– Market imperfections: ways in which existing markets
depart from the free market ideal, particularly in their
competitiveness
– Market failures: ways in which even perfectly
competitive markets are suboptimal
– Market effects: ways in which markets, whether
competitive or not, have effects on other social
institutions and practices
Six big sources of market inefficiency
1. Faulty information, especially among consumers
2. Concentrated (and thus unequal) market power
3. Externalities
4. Endogenous preferences
5. Short time horizons
6. Under-provision of public goods
7. Weaken cooperation
Sources of Market Inefficiency #1
Faulty consumer information
Markets only allocate products efficiently if people
have perfect information about what they buy, but this
is often very difficult for consumers, especially because
firms have incentives to distort information.
Sources of Market Inefficiency #2
Concentrated Economic Power
Allocative efficiency depends on perfect competition,
but actual markets are dominated by large
corporations and great unevenness in market
bargaining power. Instances of monopoly,
monopsony, and oligopoly abound.
Sources of Market Inefficiency #3
Externalities
An externality is a cost or benefit of economic
activity not reflected in market prices.
Allocative efficiency depends on prices reflecting the
true costs of producing things, but firms often
systematically displace costs and risks on others by
not including these “social costs” in the price.
Types of externalities
Any externality can be positive or negative, but there are
different kinds ...
Production externalities: activity of one producer directly affects
the welfare of another
Consumption externalities: activity of one consumer directly
affects the welfare of another
Hybrid externalities: producers directly affecting consumers in
this way, or consumers directly affecting producers
The essence of an externality, whatever its valence and of
whatever kind it is, is that the activity of one market actor
directly affects the welfare of another, as opposed to indirectly
through the price mechanism
Sources of Market Inefficiency #4
Endogenous Preferences
Pareto optimality refers to the market allocation goods
and values according to rank ordered consumer
preferences. But sometimes those preferences come
from market action itself. This happens in two ways: (1)
preference manipulation, (2) preference structuring
Sources of Market Inefficiency #5
Short Time Horizons
Competition among profit-maximizing firms leads firms
to have relatively short time-horizons. This imposes
costs on future generations for our present production
and consumption. You might think of this as an
intergenerational negative externality. Global warming
is a good example.
Sources of Market Inefficiency #6
Under-provision of Public Goods
A public good is a good characterized by “non-excludability”
and “non-rivalry”: “non-excludability” means the exclusion
principle doesn’t apply; supply one means supplied to all;
“non-rivalry” means that consumption by one of its benefit
doesn’t preclude like consumption by another
NB: Excludability depends on policy choice about rules; rivalry
depends on production possibilities
Profit-maximizing firms in competitive markets won’t produce
public goods, even ones necessary to their own health, since
they can’t make a profit from producing them
Free-rider problem (FRP)
• Problem in the production of public goods
• Contribution to their provision ensures costs, but doesn’t
guarantee gain
• Non-contribution doesn’t preclude gain, but ensures no cost
• If you’re economically rational, never makes sense to
contribute
• If everyone comes to same conclusion, no public good
PRISONER
X
Silent Confess
PRISONER
Y
Silent Both get 2 years
A
X gets 1 year
Y gets 10 years
B
Confess X gets 10 years
Y gets 1 year
C
Both get 5 years
D
THE PRISONERS’ DILEMMA
Self-interested preference ordering for X is B>A>D>C; for Y, it is
C>A>D>B. Whether X confesses or not, it make sense for Y to
confess, and vice-versa. Confession is called dominant strategy
Elements of PD
Economic rationality – only engage in those actions the
marginal return on which is greater than the marginal
cost
Strategic action – in contemplating your own action,
take into account the actions of others
Maximin criterion – in choosing among undesirable
outcomes, choose to avoid the worst
PRISONER X
Silent Confess
PRISONER Y
Silent Both get 2 years
A
X gets 1 year
Y gets 10 years
B
Confess X gets 10 years
Y gets 1 year
C
Both get 5 years
D
THE PRISONERS’ DILEMMA
Self-interested preference ordering for X is B>A>D>C; for Y is
C>A>D>B. Whether X confesses or not, make sense for Y to confess,
and vice-versa. Confession is the dominant strategy
You provide training
YES NO
All others
provide training
YES
$20K
A
$30K
B
NO
-$10K
C
$0
D
FIRM TRAINING OF WORKERS
Assume a trained worker is $30K more profitable than and
untrained one, but costs $10K to produce. Training is a good social
investment, but not worth undertaking individually, since your
trained worker might leave and you might be able to poach from
others. Your preference ordering is B>A>D>C. Result? No training.
You
YES NO
Others
YES
$50
A
$100
B
NO
-$50
C
$0
D
RECYCLING
Assume recycling costs $50 per cap but at high rates of
participation yields a per cap net benefit of $100. Preference order
is again B>A>D>C. Who will recycle on these terms?
FRP & PD generally:
Negative Externalities vs. FRP/PD
Negative externalities: I benefit from imposing costs
on you
Everyone is harmed, including
me, but I’m especially harmed by altruistic behavior
when it’s not reciprocated – i.e., when I’m suckered
PRISONER X
Silent Confess
PRISONER Y
Silent Both get 2 years
A
X gets 1 year
Y gets 10 years
B
Confess
X gets 10 years
Y gets 1 year
C
Both get 5 years
D
The sucker penalty
The cost a cooperator pays if all others defect, as compared with
having gone along with them. Here, for X, that’s C-D, or 5 years.
Your choice
Graze 1 sheep Graze 2 sheep
Everyone
else’s choice
Graze 1
sheep Everyone earns $10
A
You earn $16
Others earn $8
B
Graze 2
sheep
You earn $8
Others earn $16
C
Everyone earns $6
D
Assume productivity of land declines with increased use from
$10/sheep (2 sheep) to $8 (3 sheep) to $3 (4 sheep), with collapse
after that. Self-interested ordering for you B>A>C>D, for everyone
else it’s C>A>B>D
THE TRAGEDY OF THE COMMONS
Government provision of public goods, and/or
requirement of contribution to them: Instead of relying
on the market, the government acts to ensure that the
good is available and the costs of producing it are
shared; it restricts free-riding
Conditional altruism: People are not purely selfish –
they’re not just economically rational maximizers of
their personal utility and often happy to cooperate if
others do too (i.e., if they’re protected against being
suckered). This is a preference ordering quite different
from that contemplated in the FRP/PD
Solutions to FRP/PD
You (X)
Graze 1/1.5 sheep Graze 2 sheep
Everyone
else’s choice
Graze
1/1.5
sheep
Everyone earns
$10/$12
A
You earn $16
Others earn $8
B
Graze 2
sheep
You earn $8
Others earn $16
C
Everyone earns $6
D
THE ROMANCE/COMEDY OF THE COMMONS?
Self-interested X preference ordering: B>A>C>D
Conditional altruist (cooperative) X preference ordering: A>B>C>D
They hang the man and flog the woman
That steal the goose from off the common,
But let the greater villain loose
That steals the common from the goose.
English folk poem, circa 1764
Discourage cooperation, promote division, weaken
collective social capacity to solve common problems
• Market competition discourages cooperation
• Exaggerates social differences
• Produces disdain and envy
• Blinds to shared humanity
• Erodes community
• Commercializes morally salient aspects of life – everything’s
for sale; elimination of the “sacred”
• Hirschman spoke of “exit” and “voice,” and also “loyalty” –
some attachment to and motivation by community; market
encourages exit, but voice is what’s often needed; market
competition undermines loyalty and solidarity of all kinds
Sources of Market Inefficiency #7
The wealthy more likely to ...
• Lie
• Cheat
• Steal
• Break the law
• Look at themselves in the mirror longer
• Etc. etc.
• See http://www.pbs.org/newshour/making-sense/does-
wealth-breed-narcissism-t/ (For captioned version:
https://go.wisc.edu/92h8xu)
Markets know best, not (1)
• Efficient when precise conditions hold: complete markets
(markets in everything, now and the future), complete
information (everyone must know everything, and
therefore the same as everyone else), complete
independence (no public goods, externalities, increasing
returns)
• When these conditions fails, which they inevitably do,
there’s a case for state intervention (Bad Godesberg:
“markets whenever possible, the state where necessary”)
the idea was twofold: (a) let markets do what they do
well (allocate private goods in those cases when private
and social benefits are the same) but (b) have the state
provide public goods, correct externalities, and regulate
monopolies due to increasing returns
Markets know best, not (2)
•But politicians and institutions may have the same problem
(Buchanan, public choice) Here lies the fundamental
dilemma of economic liberalism, identified by Richard
Posner: “The economist recognizes that government can do
some things better that the free market can do but he has
no reason to believe that democratic processes will keep
government from exceeding the limits of optimal
intervention.” Riddled with “special” interests of many kinds,
all ordinarily self-serving, there’s no particular reason to
believe that states can do things better, and lots of reasons
for suspicion that they’ll do things worse
Markets know best, not (3)
•Markets are incomplete because we know that we will be making
transactions in the future but cannot perform them all now;
information is imperfect because we do not know everything about
the others with whom we do business; more particularly, information
is "endogenous" because we learn about others – their preferences,
capacities, and beliefs – by observing their conduct in the market, and
changing our prior beliefs in light of those observations. Here, the
market no longer does its magic. Supply may not equal demand (even
in equilibrium); prices do not uniquely summarize opportunity costs
and can even misinform; externalities result from most individual
actions; information is often asymmetric; market power is ubiquitous;
and "rents" abound. These are no longer "imperfections," correctable
departures from a perfect market. There is no unique, ideal market out
there to be blemished, but lots of possible institutional arrangements,
each with different consequences for social welfare.
A Standoff, Inviting Citizen Deliberation
The inefficiencies originating from incomplete markets and
endogenous information are profound. As Joseph Stiglitz put it
bluntly: "Once information imperfections (and the fact that
markets are incomplete) are brought into the analysis, as surely
they must be, there is no presumption that markets are
efficient. (emphasis added-JR) Absent that presumption, `the
standard neoclassical model,' the formal articulation of Adam
Smith's invisible hand, the contention that market economies
will ensure economic efficiency provides little guidance for the
choice of economic systems."
This is also huge!
The invisible hand(s) revealed
You don’t need to be genius to understand
the value of cooperation
But it helps to realize that you’re actually
not, whatever your senses tell you, the
center of the universe, and to try to have
some perspective on yourself, unlike ...
They hang the man and flog the woman
That steal the goose from off the common,
But let the greater villain loose
That steals the common from the goose.
English folk poem, circa 1764
